---
layout: post.njk
css: blog-post.css
title: Ethiopia situation update (16 April 2025)
date: 2025-04-16T16:09:03.463Z
image: /images/Ethio news.webp
excerpt: 'Sirad Institute for Research and Development (SIRAD) '
---
### **Civilian targeting increases while Fano-ENDF clashes decline in Amhara**

Two weeks after the four[Fano militias](https://epo.acleddata.com/actor-profiles/#1622661145930-ef6e1f53-957f)— Amhara Fano in Gondar, Shewa, Gojam, and Wello —[announced the start of a coordinated operation called Andinet](https://epo.acleddata.com/2025/04/02/ethiopia-situation-update-2-april-2025/#keytrends1)(Amharic for “unity”) to target security force bases in the Amhara region, the number of battles between the militias and government forces has decreased by over 66%, compared to the previous fortnight. This decrease comes after the beginning of operation Andinet drove an increase in battle events.

This recent decline in conflict may be related to internal strife among Fano militias, which has, according to pro-Fano activists, resulted in the killing of a prominent Fano leader from the[Amhara Popular Front](https://epo.acleddata.com/actor-profiles/#1722529435316-da54bc78-558c)(APF) in the South Gondar zone on 11 April.[1](javascript:void(0))The Fano militias’ organizational structure — which is based on birthplace, resulting in groups of Gondar Fano, Gojam Fano, Wello Fano, etc. — is susceptible to internal conflicts as the militias seek to define their identity and assert their claim as the legitimate leaders of the Fano movement. This fragmentation is one of the factors, alongside the lack of common ideology and unification under one leadership, that is affecting the group’s capacity to sustain such operations, as well as the peace talks with the government.

The APF accused the Fano militia behind the killing of one of their leaders of being supported by the[Tigray People’s Liberation Front](https://epo.acleddata.com/actor-profiles/#1622661233120-27df4ed3-a6f5)(TPLF) — the ruling party in the Tigray region.[2](javascript:void(0))This follows other accusations last month about Fano collaboration with some leaders of the[Tigray Defense Forces](https://epo.acleddata.com/actor-profiles/#1622661262372-0084b639-4904)(TDF), which is based in Tigray. On 19 March, the Ethiopian National Defense Force (ENDF) accused General Migbey Hayle, one of the top leaders of the TDF, and some unnamed associates of organizing the Fano militias in initiating their Andinet operation.[3](javascript:void(0))Migbey, the Tigray Peace and Security Bureau, and a representative of Wello Fano militias refuted the ENDF claim, denying any connections.[4](javascript:void(0))There is no concrete evidence of the Fano militias having links with the TPLF or TDF.

Despite the decline in battle events, the number of violent incidents targeting civilians has increased compared to the previous two weeks, primarily in western Amhara. Out of the 24 incidents of violence targeting civilians, 12 were recorded in Amhara, with at least 61 reported fatalities. Both government forces and Fano militias perpetrated this violence. For instance, on 31 March, the ENDF shot and killed at least 40 civilians in Birakat and its surrounding areas: Fita Michael, Senka, and Arsema Giorgis. According to reports, ahead of the killing on the same day, there was a clash between the Amhara state riot police and the ENDF about two kilometers east of Birakat town at Fita Michael Church, during which many police officers and soldiers died. The ENDF killed the civilians in retaliation during house-to-house searches. Fano militias’ attacks on civilians included an incident during the week of 2 April when militia members shot and injured a driver near Gayint area in South Gondar zone. The perpetrators fired several bullets into the truck transporting fuel and abducted two drivers. Additionally, on 7 April, Fano militias killed three civilians, including a mother and her child, and wounded an unspecified number of civilians in Debre Yaeqob kebele in Enebse Sarmder woreda, East Gojam zone. The perpetrators fired at a public bus that was transporting passengers from Mertule Mariam to Gindewoin. The Goncha Siso woreda administration head accused the militants of forbidding the movement of any vehicles, enforcing a transport strike in the woreda.[5](javascript:void(0))

### **Prime Minister Abiy appoints a new president for the Tigray interim administration**

On 8 April, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed appointed a new president, General Tadese Werede, to lead the[Interim Regional Administration of Tigray](https://epo.acleddata.com/actor-profiles/#1722529216837-b2d395fe-ff4c)for the next year.[6](javascript:void(0))This appointment comes at[the conclusion of the administration’s two-year term](https://epo.acleddata.com/2025/04/02/ethiopia-situation-update-2-april-2025/#keytrends2)and amid an[internal dispute](https://epo.acleddata.com/2024/11/08/two-years-after-the-pretoria-agreement-unrest-still-looms-in-tigray-october-2024/)within the TPLF. Tadese previously served as the deputy president of the interim administration and was the head of the TDF.

During the inaugural ceremony held at the prime minister’s office in Arat Kilo, Addis Ababa, before representatives from various international diplomatic communities, Tadese signed a document outlining eight key mandates expected of the interim administration under his leadership, including: the return of internally displaced people, disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration of fighters according to the Pretoria agreement; halting any activities or relations that violate the constitution, the Pretoria agreement, and the country’s sovereignty; and ensuring the region is prepared for an election.[7](javascript:void(0))

The Debretsion faction welcomed the new president and promised to collaborate with him.[8](javascript:void(0))However, the faction accused the federal government of not adhering to the principles of the Pretoria agreement by unilaterally making decisions and enacting laws that, according to the faction, are impacting the region.[9](javascript:void(0))As a result, the Debretsion faction urged the government to engage in political dialogue to reach a consensus on issues affecting Tigray as per the agreement. Additionally, the faction requested the African Union High-Level Panel overseeing the agreement to hold a meeting soon to discuss its implementation.[10](javascript:void(0))

Tadese’s appointment, along with the appointment of former interim president and leader of the opposing TPLF faction, Getachew Reda, as an advisor to the Prime Minister for East African Affairs,[11](javascript:void(0))may help reduce tension in the region. Hostility had significantly[escalated in March](https://epo.acleddata.com/2025/03/20/ethiopia-situation-update-19-march-2025/#keytrends1)as members of the TDF that support the Debretsion faction began to forcefully control local administrations across the region. However, the tensions between the Debretsion faction and the federal government remain high due to disputes over the interpretation and implementation of the Pretoria agreement.

### **West Shewa zone in Oromia records a slightly higher number of clashes**

From 29 March to 11 April, ACLED records 12 armed clashes between the ENDF and the[Oromo Liberation Army](https://epo.acleddata.com/actor-profiles/#1622661802591-0e52a034-00f0)(OLA) — referred to by the government as the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF)-Shane — in the Oromia region. Seven of these armed clashes were reported in the West Shewa zone. In this zone, the armed clashes between the two concentrated in Meta Robi and Abuna Ginde Beret woredas.

Since the signing of a[peace agreement](https://epo.acleddata.com/2024/12/04/ethiopia-weekly-update-3-december-2024/)between the Oromia regional government and a faction of OLA/OLF-Shane on 1 December 2024, political violence has been decreasing in the region.[12](javascript:void(0))Since December 2024, the highest number of political violence involving OLA/OLF-Shane was recorded in March 2025, with 21 events. Still, compared to the political violence trends in the region before December 2024, this is a low level of violence.
